			Harvest 1.0 by Terry R. McConnell

Harvest is the main building block of what I call my "poor man's Kermit." I
wrote it as a tool for getting around my institution's firewall policy. They
block access from outside the campus domain on all ports except port 80 - which
obviously they can never block - unless you are running their VPN client.
Unfortunately, in order to install their VPN client you need to let them 
"manage" the machine it is installed on, which basically turns it into a
brick.

Nevertheless, I have a server in my office that I need to access from at home - outside the firewall. 

Never fear. I run sshd on port 80 on my server. That at least lets me log in,
but then I have no port left to run an ftp server on, so how do I upload
and download files? 

One solution, of course, is Kermit. I have C-kermit running on both my home
machines and servers inside the firewall and this does provide a viable
solution. Harvest provides another. Together with a few other almost
universally available tools, it lets you upload and download files inside
of a terminal session. The tools needed? script, harvest (this program),
dos2unix, uuencode, and uudecode. (We include here our own implementations of
uuencode, uudecode and dos2unix since these are less available than script.)
 

As an example, suppose we want to download a file named foo.tgz from remote
to local. We do:

local> script
local> ssh remote

[ login and do whatever on remote, finishing by navigating to the
directory containing foo.tgz ]

remote> uuencode foo.tgz foo.tgz  

[ garbage fills many screens. Ignore it. Finish your work on remote ]

remote> logout
local> ^D       # stop the script by exiting from its subshell
local> harvest typescript
foo.tgz local> dos2unix foo.tgz   # harvest prints filename 
local> uudecode foo.tgz
local> rm typescript              # clean up

After this you should have a copy of foo.tgz in the current directory of
local that is identical to the copy on remote. 
  
Theory:  the script program causes EVERYTHING that is written to your terminal
to be copied to a file. This file is called typescript by default. (You
can change the name if you want - see script(1).)  

INSTALLATION

Edit the makefile and then say make all and make install. This will make
and install harvest, uuencode, uudecode, and dos2unix. (You could not
install uuencode and/or dos2unix if you already have those installed on
your site.) Copy the man page harvest.1 to the appropriate directory for
your site, and edit the paths in the shell script reap and copy to a directory
on your path if you want to use it. 

Terry R. McConnell
2458 Swift Rd.
Lafayette, NY 13084
trmcconn@syr.edu

