		MSEQ: C-code for studying the "M-sequence"

	The M-sequence is a psuedo random sequence introduced by 
A. Ehrenfeucht and J. Mycielski in "A psuedo-random sequence -- how random
is it?", Amer. Math. Monthly 99(1992),373-375. In brief, the sequence of
binary digits starts 010. Thereafter, one determines the next digit as
follows: find the longest sequence occuring at the end which also occurs 
previously. If there is more than one previous occurrence, consider the last
one. The next digit is the opposite of the one following that last previous
occurrence. Thus, the sequence "avoids repetition." 

	This package contains code for studying the M-sequence. The file
mseq.c contains the main program and a routine that calculates terms of
the m-sequence and builds a database containing information about its
properties. The number of terms generated can be controlled at compile
time by editing the settings of MAX_NODES and MAX_LEVEL which are #defined
in mseq.h. (It is time to mention that in order to use this package you
need to be a C programmer.) In addition, smaller build sizes can be
selected at run time using the -n option. (The main program is designed
to report usage information and exit if it is invoked with the flag -h.)

	As distributed, the main program is designed to do nothing but
build the requested number of terms and report that fact to the user. To
do something useful you will need to select report generating routines from
util.c and include them in the obvious place in main. For example, the
line 

print_mseq(20);

included at the appropriate place will print the first 20 terms of the
m-sequence to the program's standard output.  

Documentation for the routines in util.c is included with the source code.

You can of course add your own routines to util.c. You will need to read
the supporting code in main.c first in order to understand the "API." I have
tried to make the code as readable as possible.

Bear in mind that the run time of this program increases rapidly with
the number of terms requested. For example, on my 550 MHZ pentium III Xeon
it took under 1 second to build 10000 terms, but almost 24 hours to build
1 million. 

For further information on the m-sequence consult my web page:

http://barnyard.syr.edu/mseq/mseq.shtml.

I would be pleased to discuss this program or the m-sequence itself. I
can be reached at the email address tmc@barnyard.syr.edu.


Terry R. McConnell
215 Carnegie
Syracuse, NY 13244-1150
(315)443-1491(work)

