README for THUE 1.0

This package includes C language source code for two programs, thue, and
matches, a unix-style makefile, and various other files of interest described
below. To build the package, edit the makefile to conform to your own setup
and then say make all. The resulting executables can then be copied to an
appropriate place by hand, or by using the install target. 

Define the macro USEMYKMP to use the author's own implementation of strstr (see
the kmp.c file) in place of the library routine. This has no particular 
advantage, but kmp.c may be of interest for study. 

Also included is the file thuemorse.txt containing 64K of the Thue-Morse 
sequence to play with, and the file squarefree.txt containing 64K of the
squarefree word on 3 letters. Both have newline characters interpolated every
80 characters for enhanced readability.

In addition, there is a pdf file containing some background on the Thue-Morse 
and related sequences, including complete solutions of some relevant 
exercises from Lothaire's textbook Combinatorics on Words.

thue is a command line program that generates prefixes of the Thue-Morse 
sequence. It can also generate prefixes of the square-free sequence on 3
letters abc constructed by Axel Thue. Usage information for thue is as
follows:

thue [-hvdtcrlxi] [-u a b ] [-o filename] n: Print n digits of the Thue-Morse
sequence followed by newline
-h: print this helpful message and exit
-v: print version number and exit
-d: turn on debug mode
-t: run experimental (test) code and exit (may do nothing)
-u: use the following two characters in place of digits 0 and 1
-c: print bitwise complement
-r: print output in reverse order
-o: print to filename rather than stdout
-l: print a newline character after every 80 characters
-x: print square free sequence on letters a,b,c instead (-c, -u ignored)
-i: print some reference information about the sequence and exit

For example, the file thuemorse.txt was created using the command line

thue -l -u a b -o thuemorse.txt 65536

(The -u a b option creates a sequence using the alphabet {a,b} rather than 
the default {0,1}.) 

The file squarefree.txt was created using the command line

thue -l -x -o squarefree.txt 65536

matches is a program that can be used to demonstrate properties of the 
Thue-Morse sequence and related sequences. It is essentially just
a convenient front end to the strstr routine. Usage information:

matches [-hvVdnx] [-i k] l: analyze stdin for matching substrings of length l
-h: print this helpful information and exit
-v: print version number and exit
-V: more verbose output
-d: turn on debug mode
-n: ignore newlines in input
-x: run experimental code and exit (may do nothing)
-i: look for matches of intimacy k or more only 
(intimacy = amount of overlap, 0 is a square)

As an example, let us demonstrate the fact that squarefree.txt contains no
squares:

matches -n -i 0 5 < squarefree.txt

Read 65536 characters
Found 65516 matches of length 5
Found 0 matches of intimacy i > -1

This shows that squarefree.txt contains no strings of the form xx where x has
length 5. Similar results are obtained if 5 is replaced by any other length.
(The -n option ignores the newline characters at the end of each line that
were put there by the thue routine.)

On other hand, the Thue-Morse sequence contains many squares:

thue -n -i 0 3 < thuemorse.txt
Read 65536 characters
Found 65528 matches of length 3
Found 5460 matches of intimacy i > -1
i bar = 0.000000, (avg intimacy)

The average intinacy of matches of intimacy greater than -1 is exactly 0 
(i.e., only squares are present) since there are no overlapping matches. 
