This is the place to store implementations of various turing machines. I
suggest placing related machines in a common subdirectory. Thus this
directory should only contain this file and names of directories. 

I suggest using a .t extension to denote turing programs.

Here are the current collections and brief descriptions. See the directory
for any other documentation.

1. Logic

The logic directory contains examples relevant to issues in symbolic logic
and computability theory. See the files themselves for references.

Conventions for logic code

The alphabet is B and |. B stands for a blank cell and | for a nonblank cell.
The routines implement basic machines for manipulating the tape contents
and for implementing arithmetic functions. Arithmetic functions expect to
find a B separated list of arguments on the tape, each argument being the
representation of a whole number. We let |||...|, where there are n+1 |'s,
represent n. Calling convention is to put prepend directives in the 
calling file.

2. Universal 

The universal directory contains an implementation of a universal turing
machine. The initial tape for this machine consists of a sequence of cells
representing the instructions for a machine to be simulated, followed by an 
end of instruction marker, followed by the initial tape description for
the machine to be simulated. (A tape description shows the current location
of the read head and the current state, as well as the contents of the tape.) 
In brief, a cycle of the universal machine works as follows:

	1) Search the instruction part of the tape for a pair that matches
           the current state/cell-contents pair.

	2) If a matching instruction is found
           either move the read head marker, or change the 
           appropriate cell of the data portion of the tape, depending on
	   what action is encoded in the matching instruction.

	3) Begin the next cycle.

The machine halts when no matching instruction can be found.
 
3. Misc

Programs you can't decide where else to put.
